.TH PV 1 "July 2026" "pv 0.5" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
pv \- Pressure Valve: intelligent process lifecycle management
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pv
.RI [ COMMAND ]
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.nf
         .  .  .
        .  .  .  .
          _______
         /_______\e
        |\e \e   / /|
        | \e \e / / |
        |  \e V /  |
        |  /   \e  |
        | /     \e |
        |/_______\e|
          |  |  |
       ___|  |  |___
      /             \e
   __|               |__
  |___|             |___|
.fi
.PP
\fBpv\fR treats a process not as a PID that is either running or dead, but
as an \fIintent\fR with lifecycle semantics. It infers what each process is
trying to accomplish, predicts resource exhaustion before it happens, and
can suspend, resume, detach, and migrate work accordingly. The process is
no longer sacred; the objective is.
.PP
All state is read from \fI/proc\fR, \fI/sys\fR, and kernel PSI
(\fI/proc/pressure/*\fR). No daemon is required for the one-shot commands;
\fBpv daemon\fR adds continuous observation, habit learning, and
notifications.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B pv
Dashboard: pressure bars (CPU/RAM/IO/battery/thermals), the fullest
filesystem as a DISK line, the contextual process view, and concrete
recommendations.
.TP
.B pv ps
Contextual process list: each app with its inferred intent and lifecycle
capabilities (suspend, interrupt, migrate).
.TP
.B pv pressure
Detailed pressure breakdown, including memory burn rate and projected OOM
ETA when memory is genuinely draining.
.TP
.B pv storage
Filesystem capacity report: usage bar, size, and free space per real mount,
fullest first. Pseudo filesystems, loop devices (snap), and container
overlays are hidden. Warns when any filesystem is 90% full.
When the fullest filesystem reaches 85%, pv spawns \fBdeckhand inspect\fR
detached in the background and caches the result for six hours; the next
run shows a RECLAIMABLE section with the total and heaviest projects, and
the dashboard DISK line carries the reclaimable total. pv never blocks on
the scan; without deckhand on PATH the section stays hidden.
.TP
.B pv explain
Plain-language explanation of the current system state.
.TP
.BI "pv intent " cmd...
Classify a command without running it: interruptibility, suspend safety,
migratability, GPU needs.
.TP
.BI "pv label " prompt...
Record natural-language working context. A general prompt is saved as global
context. Tutorial, video, and YouTube prompts are matched to the largest
active browser and grant it a 15-minute recommendation grace, preventing an
idle tab from being recommended for suspension while it is being used.
.TP
.BI "pv run -- " cmd...
Run a command as a detached session (setsid, logged). Survives terminal and
SSH disconnects. \fB--remote\fR \fIhost\fR rsyncs the working directory to
a configured host and runs the command there over ssh instead.
.TP
.B pv sessions
List pv sessions with last log line.
.TP
.BI "pv attach " id
Follow a session's output; exits when the session ends.
.TP
.BI "pv suspend " target
Gracefully freeze an app (by name or pid): sync, SIGSTOP, record state.
Protected intents (ssh, runtimes, databases, package operations) are
refused unless \fB--force\fR. Apps group by executable name, so suspending
a name freezes every matching process at once. If recording fails, all
stopped processes are thawed again.
.TP
.BI "pv resume " target
Thaw a suspended app. Each recorded PID's start time is re-verified before
signalling, so a recycled PID is never signalled by mistake.
.TP
.BI "pv kill " target
Terminate a suspended app (thaw, then SIGTERM, with the same start-time
verification).
.TP
.B pv suspended
List suspended apps with held memory and freeze age.
.TP
.BR "pv policy " [ --apply ] [ --init ]
Evaluate pressure policies from \fI~/.config/pv/policies.toml\fR. Dry-run by
default; \fB--apply\fR acts (suspend / renice+ionice / notify).
.TP
.BR "pv hosts " [ --init ]
List configured remote hosts with online probes.
.TP
.BI "pv migrate " target " [" --to " host" ]
Move restartable work (builds, encodes) to a remote host: rsync the working
directory, re-run the command there over ssh, stream output back. No
process state crosses \(em this is re-execution, not checkpointing, and
the local process keeps running. Refuses non-migratable intents.
.TP
.BR "pv daemon " [ --interval " N" ] [ --desktop ] [ --install ]
Continuous observation: learns a per-hour demand profile, tracks variance,
and vents rustic valve-card notifications (8 valves: memory, demand spike,
reclaimable reserve, swap thrash, erratic demand, habit forecast, battery,
thermals). \fB--install\fR writes a systemd --user unit.
.TP
.BR "pv notify " [ --desktop ]
Emit valve cards for the current state, then exit.
.TP
.B pv habits
Show the learned per-hour demand profile.
.TP
.BR "pv live " [ --interval " N" ] [ --model " M" ] [ --no-infer ]
Persistent dynamic view: realtime metrics, RSS trend arrows, and a
streaming Groq inference panel. Inference re-fires on meaningful state
change or a 120 s heartbeat. Default model: llama-3.1-8b-instant.
.TP
.B pv doctor
Environment preflight: probes the external tools pv shells out to (see
REQUIREMENTS) and the optional configuration files, reporting which
features degrade when something is absent. Exits 1 when a required tool
is missing.
.TP
.BR "pv update " [ --source ] [ --system ] [ --force ] [ --check ]
Self-update: latest GitHub release binary (fallback: clone + build from
source). Installs to \fI~/.local/bin\fR, or \fI/usr/local/bin\fR with
\fB--system\fR (via sudo). \fB--check\fR compares versions only.
.SH REQUIREMENTS
pv keeps its crate dependencies tiny (clap/serde/toml) by shelling out to
standard Unix tools instead of linking libraries.
.B pv doctor
verifies the environment and reports which features degrade when a tool
is absent.
.SS Core (required)
.TP
.B curl
Groq inference transport; release downloads in \fBpv update\fR.
.TP
.B sha256sum
Checksum verification of downloaded release binaries.
.SS Optional (the matching feature degrades gracefully)
.TP
.BR ssh ", " rsync
\fBpv migrate\fR and \fBpv run --remote\fR.
.TP
.BR git ", " cargo
\fBpv update --source\fR (clone + build fallback).
.TP
.B notify-send
Desktop bridge for valve notifications (\fB--desktop\fR).
.TP
.B getconf
Precise CPU tick rate.
.TP
.BR renice ", " ionice
Policy throttle actions (\fBpv policy --apply\fR).
.TP
.B stty
\fBpv live\fR terminal mode.
.TP
.B deckhand
Reclaim analysis in \fBpv storage\fR: under storage pressure pv runs
\fBdeckhand inspect\fR in the background and reports what build artifacts
can be reclaimed.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/pv/policies.toml
Pressure policy rules (\fBpv policy --init\fR for defaults).
.TP
.I ~/.config/pv/hosts.toml
Remote hosts for migration (\fBpv hosts --init\fR for a template).
.TP
.I ~/.config/pv/groq_api_key
Groq API key (alternative to the environment variable).
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/pv/
State: sessions/, suspended.toml, habits.toml, deckhand_scan.json (reclaim
analysis cache, refreshed at most every six hours under storage pressure).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B GROQ_API_KEY
Groq API key for \fBpv live\fR inference. Without it the panel degrades to
an offline notice and metrics stay live.
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disable colored output.
.TP
.B PV_COLOR
Set to \fIalways\fR to force color when piping (e.g. to \fBless -R\fR).
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME / XDG_DATA_HOME
Override config/state locations (empty means unset, per spec).
.SH EXIT STATUS
0 on success; 1 on operational errors (unknown target, refused action,
failed migration); 2 on usage errors.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B pv suspend firefox
Freeze an idle browser, reclaiming its memory until resumed.
.TP
.B pv run -- cargo build --release
Detached, disconnect-proof build; follow with \fBpv attach\fR.
.TP
.B pv migrate cargo --to desktop
Rsync the workspace and re-run the build on the remote host.
.TP
.B pv live --model llama-3.3-70b-versatile
Dynamic view with the sharper Groq model.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ps (1),
.BR top (1),
.BR kill (1),
.BR renice (1),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR criu (8)
.PP
Ecosystem: kaptaind(1), amber(1), fract(1), locksmith(1), bound(1), marty(1).
.SH AUTHOR
Vico Labs \(em https://github.com/elci-group/pv
.SH LICENSE
MIT
